Canada is concerned.
NORAD has existed since the Cold War.
The Canadian Arctic was then fitted with complex
networks of radar stations,
and their goal was to detect incoming threats
from the Soviet Union.
Like most Arctic projects of that era,
it was built and operated largely by the United States.
But if we look at the Canadian Arctic today,
it paints a different picture.
These lands are remote and lack critical infrastructure.
They haven't been developed like Alaska,
and they aren't being used
for trade and defense like the Russian Arctic.
Well, Canada controls a third of the Arctic region,
their investments only account for 2%.
Is it time for Canada to start developing
the Arctic, like the US or Russia?
Or is there a good reason to stand back?
This is the Canadian Arctic...
with Hindsight.
The balance of power is shifting north.
Canada's map stretches
from the Pacific to Atlantic and Arctic Ocean,
but these northern lands
haven't yet reached provincial status.
And this might become a geopolitical flashpoint.
A new trade route.
The Northwest Passage is opening as sea ice retreats.
But on the other side of the north Pole,
there's a more immediate threat.
Russia is increasing its Arctic defense investments,
and thus defense budgets everywhere are rising.
Canada is now planning to use this
to massively develop its Arctic region.
A big change is coming and let me explain why.
Long before Europeans arrived,
These lands were inhabited by indigenous peoples.
In 1867,
four colonies joined in the south
as the Dominion of Canada
and that same year the United States bought Alaska.
The Americans were aggressively
expanding west, and the Canadians feared
that they might wanted to expand into the prairies.
Canada set the goal to expand from sea to sea.
The vast North American continent
was inhabited by groups of indigenous peoples,
and most of it was owned by the Hudson's Bay company.
They bought furs from indigenous hunters
and transported them over a vast network of rivers
and trails to European markets.
But by the late 1860s, when Canada was formed,
fashion trends had evolved
and the company was struggling.
In the West, British Columbia, then a colony of the United Kingdom,
also had deep financial problems,
and they feared that the Americans
would want to absorb their territory
to have a land connection to Alaska.
So they struck a deal.
The Hudson's Bay company sold their lands to Canada
for 300,000 pounds,
which is roughly 8.2 million USD in today's money.
This region in the south gained provincial status
and the rest remained a territory
and the following year, British Columbia joined as a province in part
for a promise to build a railroad.
Canada over the next few decades expanded from sea to sea.
The British transferred the Arctic Archipelago,
and down south
they continued carving out new provinces
out of their acquired territory.
The Klondike Gold Rush led to the creation of the Yukon
and a surge of immigration
led to Alberta and Saskatchewan.
It wasn't until 1949, with the inclusion of Newfoundland,
that they truly had expanded from coast to coast
with Canadian provinces, but the northernmost regions
were still largely undeveloped
and were Canadian territories.
This is where we started to see
a major change between Canada and the United States.
Washington aggressively funded the development of Alaska,
its Arctic territory,
and immigrants flocked to the region
in search of quick riches.
Their population increased substantially over the years,
and particularly after WW2.
But Canada didn't pursue such policies.
They didn't encourage population growth.
They didn't build supportive infrastructure
or military facilities.
The indigenous communities that lived here
were still largely ignored from a policy standpoint,
but that is changing.
The Canadian Arctic consists of three territories.
The Northwest Territories and Nunavut,
and they're extremely sparsely populated.
Nunavut alone covers almost 2,000,000km², yet
only 40,000 people live here.
85% are indigenous.
The highest percentage of the three.
In a Northwest Territories,
indigenous people make up about half of the population.
and in Yukon, little over 20%.
And life here is tough.
Canada is currently living through an extreme affordability crisis.
Prices are rising incredibly fast
while wages aren't keeping up.
But it's even worse in the Arctic.
Most consumer goods here are imported by air,
and this isolation makes everything expensive.
Since 2000, consumer prices
have risen between 40 and 60% on average.
But there are very few opportunities here to compensate
higher prices with higher wages.
Many jobs here depend on seasonal mining activities,
on federal funding or government jobs.
But there's something in the air.
I already told you that the early
mission of Canada was to expand
from sea to sea,
and that is now become their official motto.
But there's another sea up there.
The Arctic Ocean for most of the year is covered with ice.
But that is decreasing.
The maximum extent of sea ice
has been trending down for decades,
and this opens these waters for shipping.
The number of ships in the region
has increased by 37% over the last decade or so.
And once these waters are safe enough
for consistent container traffic,
it would change global supply chains.
This is something that has already been
substantially covered in other YouTube videos.
And this is the idea.
A ship that is traveling from Asia to Europe
would no longer have to go through the Panama Canal.
And this would help them
save thousands of miles of travel
and hundreds of thousands of dollars on fuel.
Canada could charge a transit fee,
and this could help support local communities.
But there is a more immediate upside to retreating ice.
Tourism.
It has become commonplace for major cruise liners
to offer trips to the Canadian Arctic.
The region is an ecological wonderland
with a strong cultural heritage, and it's pristine.
All these places have been visited by cruise ships
between 2014 and 2019.
This could evolve into a major segment of the economy,
providing jobs for local communities.
The number of cruise ships
has more than doubled since the 1990s,
and the number of pleasure yachts has increased
by a factor of 40.
Tourism can play a part in the development of this region,
but currently it's still a niche sector.
In 2024,
the vast archipelago was only visited by 87 cruise ships.
The vast majority of ships are fishing vessels,
which is another segment of the economy
that is now opening.
Less sea ice means less treacherous waters
and a longer window of opportunity to fish.
There are also believed to be some natural resources,
especially in this bay between Canada and Greenland.
But none of these matters if Canada's
sovereignty isn't recognized.
In 1985,
a U.S. Coast Guard vessel transited the Northwest Passage
without requesting permission from Canada.
Canada responded by drawing straight baselines around the archipelago,
which in simple terms means that it declared
these waters as internal waters
where foreign countries need Canada's permission to sail.
But that's not recognized by everyone.
China made its position clear.
They consider these international waters,
where they believe all countries are free to pass.
The position of the United States has remained unchanged.
The US fears that if they accept Canada's
claim that these are internal waters,
that it would set a precedent for other countries to do the same.
Iran could argue that the Strait of Hormuz
is an internal waterway.
China could say that the South China Sea are internal waters.
They defend the broader
principle of freedom of navigation,
also in a Canadian Arctic.
It doesn't help Canada's case, though,
that the Arctic region is so desolate.
This is the Arctic population by country.
Most people live in Russia,
followed by the US and second to last, Canada.
Even though 40% of Canada's landmass
lies within the Arctic region,
only about 0.3% of the population live here.
They invest substantially less in the Arctic than other countries.
Arctic investments account for just 0.6% of
total government investments
between 2017 and 2021,
which doesn't change anything about Canada's
sovereignty in the Arctic.
But it does make Canada less of an Arctic power.
I like to look at these stories in a wider
historical perspective, and the story of Canada
started with the expansion from coast to coast,
and technically the already reached the coast up there as well.
But these territories, these northern regions,
they are still categorized as territories.
They are sparsely populated.
They lack critical infrastructure
and diversified economies.
Ukraine was a turning point.
The Arctic Council was suspended and Canada and the U.S.
announced multi-billion dollar deals.
NORAD is unique.
It is the only military command structure in the world
that is shared by two countries.
The commander is a U.S. 4 star General,
and a deputy commander, a Canadian 3 star General.
They watch for incoming aircrafts or missile threats.
Most of them are approaching through the Arctic.
Since 2022,
they announced major deals amounting to billions
and sometimes tens of billions of dollars to invest
in modernizing these systems.
This happened before during the Cold War,
and this led to very brief, localized economic growth,
but it didn't translate into prosperity on the ground.
Many American companies were contracted,
and many radar stations were staffed by Americans
or Canadians from southern regions.
But this time around, the Canadian government
put community outcomes front and center.
They prioritize northern contractors.
They focus on building infrastructure
that serves the military
as well as local communities
and they aim to create jobs for locals.
These are the stated goals of the Canadian government.
This is their central philosophy this time around
to use defense spending to help develop the Arctic region in some way
similar to what the United States has done in Alaska.
And while everything I've said so far
about the relatively low level of investment
of Canada in its Arctic regions is true,
there's another side to this story.
In 1999,
Canada separated the Northwest Territories to create Nunavut.
The goal was to give Inuit people greater self-governance
over their traditional lands.
And this was the largest land claims agreement in world history.
Canada has protected large swaths of wilderness.
They took a leading role
in promoting peaceful cooperation
when they founded the Arctic Council,
and they have made great progress by
empowering indigenous communities through
revenue sharing agreements and investments
in health care and education.
I'm rooting for them.
I fail to see how these waters could be anything but Canadian.
Regardless of whether publicly saying sell is a strategic
policy decision, they just have to start acting
a little bit more like it.
So we put a lot of effort and time and money
into making these videos,
but lately we've not had a lot of success.
We've had quite a number of videos that underperformed,
and that's also one of the reasons
why I'm not working with sponsors
that much as I did in the past.
And I can see from the analytics that most of you
that are watching this
video are not subscribed to the channel.
If you're looking for an effortless
and free way to help support my work,
consider subscribing to the channel.
Another thing that would really help
is if you could like this video or if you could show
some positive engagement in the comment section,
because this helps trigger the YouTube algorithm.
And then after that, here are two more videos
that you can consider for your next watch.